---
layout: post
title: "Tonsole"
date: '2016-02-29'
description: "Wrapper around Javascript's console that adds return values"
series: jshole
---

Tired of debugging your Javascript with `alert` or fumbling about with big, bulky debuggers? Ever wish you could add some `console.log` to your arrow functions, but still return a value?

Well fret no longer! Introducing [tonsole][src]: everyone's favorite vestigial logger. Tonsole is a drop-in replacement for [Node's console][console] that both logs and returns the logged value; a two-in-one that's functional and fun!

Adding logging to an ordinary Javascript expression is a real pain, and can even be dangerous:

```js
let compute = (data) => data ? process(data.value) : data;

// Fa, la, la. Just adding some logging. What could possibly go wrong...
compute = (data) => {
    if (!data) {
        console.error('Invalid data: ', data);
        // hope I don't hurt myself with all these dangerous statements...
        return data;
    } 
    const r = process(data.value);
    console.log('Processed data: ', r);
    // woooooops...
    return data;
};
// ZOMGTHERESBLOODEVERYWHERE!!!!!!!!!!
```

Uh oh, what a mess!

But tonsole makes adding logging fast and safe for the whole family:

```bash
$ npm install --save tonsole
```

```js
const tonsole = require('tonsole');

compute = (data) =>
    data
        ?tonsole.log('Processed data: ', process(data.value))
        :tonsole.error('Invalid data: ', data);
```

And just look at that nice clean expression! You can't get results like that with ordinary `console`.

Tonsole is great for composition too:

```js
compute = _.compose(tonsole.log.bind(null, "Result: "), compute);
```

If you've ever used `console.log`, you can use tonsole. Using a patented nano-combinating process, Tonsole wraps the entire [Node console api][console] and adds return values to all your favorite functions, including `console.log`, `console.error`, and even `console.assert`! And, just in case you're ever confused, [tonsole's got some incredible documentation][docs] that's sure to clear things right up!

Similar libraries retail for thousands of dollars. But now, in a special [Npm exclusive offer][npm], tonsole can be yours for zero dollars and zero cents, including shipping and handling! We'll even throw in the [source code][src] and a [digital copy of the documentation][docs]! Amazing!

So change that *C* to a *T* and set your expressions free!

`npm install --save tonsole` today!



[docs]: https://github.com/mattbierner/tonsole
[npm]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/tonsole
[src]: https://github.com/mattbierner/tonsole
[console]: https://nodejs.org/api/console.html