---
layout: post
title: "I U+2764 Everyone"
date: '2016-02-04'
description: "Spreading love on Twitter"
series: bandarlog
---

**Update**
Alas! banned after a mere 31 messages. But I've seen the error of my ways and created a [new bot to continue spreading love to #everything](/i-u2764-everything/).

*******

To celebrate Valentine's Day, I've decided to use Twitter to send a personal and heartfelt message of love to each and every one of my 300 million fellow creatures. But, as much as I love all of you, the prospect of actually typing out 300 million tweets was just not that appealing, so instead I told my computer how to share love on my behalf.

[@_LovedArt][_lovedart] is a simple Twitter bot that builds up a database of sad, lonely, little users and, once every five minutes, picks a lucky lover for whom the bot tweets, "@USER, I ❤️ you". Each user will be loved at most once. At this rate, the bot should finish its first iteration in around 3000 years.

[Source and instructions on how to run this bot yourself are on github][src].

## Why?
Why not? The world needs more love.

## Isn't this spam?
No, the bot is designed to only contact users once. It also runs at a very low rate so as to not consume many of Twitter's resources. Nothing is being sold and there are [no malicious intentions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ILOVEYOU). All this bot does is post, "I ❤️ you", slowly working its way through the entire community of active Twitter users. That's it. Seriously.

I feel that this bot uses Twitter as it was intended, and improves the Twitter community by making it a more loving and random place.

## Will Twitter consider this spam?
Probably. A fun, little bot like this will most likely be banned after a few hours, while advertisers are free to spew all sorts of shit at users. So it goes.


Anyone is free to continue the mission of [@\_LovedArt][_lovedart] if it falls by banhammer. [Love conquers all.](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Love_dart)


[_lovedart]: https://twitter.com/_lovedart
[src]: https://github.com/mattbierner/i-u2764-everyone
