---
layout: post
title: Gif Slice
description: 
series: gif
titleImage:
    file: 'title.png'
date: '2018-04-02'
---

**Links**
- [Site][site]
- [Source](https://github.com/mattbierner/gif-slice)
- [Report an issue](https://github.com/mattbierner/gif-slice/issues)

Turn any gif into a small piece of wall art using *[Gif Slice][site]*. The site works by converting the gif into a cube and then letting you take a 2D slice of that cube. The resulting slice captures multiple frames of the original gif.

You can currently order 12x12 inch matte paper prints of your slice (optionally framed). Upload your own gifs or select one from giphy. Check out [the site][site] to see what interesting slices you can come up with. 

{% include image.html file="original.gif" description="Gif" %}

{% include image.html file="slices.png" description="Gif slices" %}

The idea of slicing gifs comes from one of [my earlier experiments](/cube-gif). While I find the concept cool, I am not convinced that gif slices are an all that appealing product. Even just explaining what they are is difficult. The low quality/resolution of the source gifs also means that abstract designs produce the best results. (The gif cubes themselves would actually be a far better product IMO, if I only knew how to make physical versions of them.)

I mainly built *Gif Slice* to learn. While I have run a small Amazon shop for years, and have also sold many one-off products elsewhere online, I have never tried selling outside of a major storefront. Gif Slice let me learn a little about what is involved in selling custom physical products online. I also automated the ordering pipeline so that it requires as little involvement as possible. 

Retrospecting though, my learning here focused on the easy parts: the technology and the creating. Actually understanding what people may find appealing and how to sell is the next challenge. As the [Theremin-X project proposal](/theremin-x-proposal) has shown, this is not my strong suit. Gif slice gives me a good foundation to build so that I can hopefully continue learning, experimenting, and improving in these areas as well.

[site]: https://gif-slice.com
