---
layout: post
title: "In The Walls 1.3: The balls to the walls update"
description: Distorting walls with 3D snapshots from the front facing camera.
series: arr
titleImage:
    file: 'pop.gif'
titleVideo:
    file: 'pop.mp4'
---

That's not the official subtitle. For one, I'm pretty sure the App Store wouldn't allow it. Nor do I at all endorse using *In The Walls* for any sort of X-rated, third dimensional, AR peacockery.

However, if you've ever wanted to go quite literally balls to the walls, then [*In The Walls* 1.3][app] certainly has you covered. And the fun does not stop there either! <!-- Here, a less mature person might have used the transition, "it goes far deeper than balls too". Thankfully, dear html reader, I am not such a person --> For with the new update, you can put your hands, feet, ears, biceps, shoulders, navel, and even buttocks on the walls thanks to the wonders of AR.

{% include youtube.html width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/QpnLpRjujmM" %}

To get started, tap the face icon in the bottom bar and select the "Face" tab. If your device has a True Depth camera, then you should see a new "Depth Snapshot" face effect available for $0.99. Depth Snapshot uses your phone's front facing camera to capture a 3D snapshot of the current scene which can then be projected on the walls.

{% include video.html file="butt.mp4" poster="butt-poster.png" description="I swear my ass is not nearly this large or lumpy in real life" %}

Besides allowing you to put your butt on walls—which, let's be honest, is probably what you were thinking of doing too—the Depth Snapshot effect also better captures your facial structure, expressions, hair style, and clothing. This makes the wall face much more recognizable as you. Unlike the normal face effects, it isn't limited to human faces either: you can capture pets, objects, and more. So many possibilities! And who knows, there may even be some good possibilities scattered in there among all the bad ones!

<!-- Now we just need to raise enough money to get Kim in on this wall anatomy action (and no, not Kim Dot Com, although, come to think of it, Mr. Com certainly would offer a whole mot more bang for the buck...) -->

{% include video.html file="sculpture-park.mp4" poster="sculpture-park-poster.png" %}

So [give the new update a try][app] and [let me know](https://twitter.com/mattbierner) if you come up with any fun (PG rated) uses of the Depth Snapshot feature. 

[app]: https://apps.apple.com/us/app/id1522257130 