---
layout: post
title: "In The Walls 1.4: The I'm So Floored Update"
description: "Look at the 1.4 update for In The Walls: An AR app for iOS about distorting surfaces with your face"
series: modded_reality
titleImage:
    file: 'title.gif'
titleVideo:
    file: 'title.mp4'
---

[In the Walls][app] 1.4 is now live!

{% include youtube.html width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/-rZ9YFcUSsk" %}

As the update subtitle suggests, the big new feature this time around is that you can now place faces on both vertical and horizontal surfaces. Rise from the floor like a proper T-1000, or stamp on your beautiful visage for kicks. With *In The Walls*, you get to pick your preferred dystopia!

Other highlights:

- Tap and drag to freely rotate the placed face.

    This works on both vertical and horizontal surfaces.

- Improved video recording controls.

    Long press the photo button to start a three second countdown before recording begins. Tap the photo button again to stop the recording. This makes it much easier to capture longer videos and also lets you adjust the face settings while recording.

- Improved face placement.

    While placing the face, the app should now always pick the closest surface, instead of the first surface it detects.

- Added some new free pre-recorded expressions.

- Bug fixes and optimization.

In addition, the 1.4 update brings the 2020 inspired "Yell Pack", a new in-app purchase with 10 animated yells. Send off the year from hell with a yell. It's just swell.

Looking forward to see what people create using some of these new creative options. Get In The Walls 1.4 [in the App Store][app] today.

[app]: https://apps.apple.com/us/app/id1522257130 